Section 2: CLIPS Overview
=========================

This section gives a general overview of CLIPS and of the basic concepts
used through­out this manual.

2.1 Interacting with CLIPS
--------------------------

CLIPS expert systems may be executed in three ways: interactively using
a simple, text-oriented, command prompt interface; interactively using a
window/menu/mouse interface on certain ma­chines; or as embedded expert
systems in which the user provides a main pro­gram and controls
execution of the expert system. Embedded applications are dis­cussed in
the *Advanced Programming Guide*. In addition, a series of commands can
be automatically read di­rectly from a file when CLIPS is first started
or as the result of the **batch** command.

The generic CLIPS interface is a simple, interactive, text-oriented,
command prompt interface for high porta­bility. The stan­dard usage is
to create or edit a knowledge base using any standard text editor, save
the knowledge base as one or more text files, exit the editor and
execute CLIPS, then load the knowledge base into CLIPS. The in­terface
provides commands for viewing the current state of the sys­tem, tracing
execu­tion, adding or removing information, and clearing CLIPS.

A more sophisticated window interface is available for the Macintosh,
Windows 3.1, and X Window environments. All interface commands described
in this section are available in the window interfaces. These interfaces
are described in more detail in the *Interfaces Guide*.

2.1.1 Top Level Commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The primary method for interacting with CLIPS in a non-embedded
environment is through the CLIPS **command prompt** (or **top level**).
When the “CLIPS>” prompt is printed, a command may be entered for
evaluation. Commands may be function calls, constructs, local or global
variables, or constants. If a function call is entered (see section
2.3.2), that function is evaluated and its return value is printed.
Function calls in CLIPS use a prefix notation—the operands to a function
always appear after the function name. Entering a construct definition
(see section 2.3.3) at the CLIPS prompt creates a new construct of the
appropriate type. Entering a global variable (see section 2.4.3) causes
the value of the global variable to be printed. Local variables can be
set at the command prompt using the bind function and retain their value
until a reset or clear command is issued. Entering a local variable at
the command prompt causes the value of the local variable to be printed.
Entering a constant (see section 2.3.1) at the top level causes the
constant to be printed (which is not very useful). For example,
::

	CLIPS (V6.30 3/11/15)
	
	CLIPS> (+ 3 4)
	
	7
	
	CLIPS> (defglobal ?*x\* = 3)
	
	CLIPS> ?*x\*
	
	3
	
	CLIPS> red
	
	red
	
	CLIPS> (bind ?a 5)
	
	5
	
	CLIPS> (+ ?a 3)
	
	8
	
	CLIPS> (reset)
	
	CLIPS> ?a
	
	[EVALUATN1] Variable a is unbound
	
	FALSE
	
	CLIPS>

The previous example first called the addition function adding the
numbers 3 and 4 to yield the result 7. A global variable ?*x\* was then
defined and given the value 3. The variable ?*x\* was then entered at
the prompt and its value of 3 was returned. Finally the constant symbol
*red* was entered and was returned (since a constant evaluates to
itself).

2.1.2 Automated Command Entry and Loading
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some operating systems allow additional arguments to be specified to a
program when it begins execution. When the CLIPS executable is started
under such an operating system, CLIPS can be made to automatically
execute a series of commands read directly from a file or to load
constructs from a file. The command-line syntax for starting CLIPS and
automatically reading commands or loading constructs from a file is as
follows:

``Syntax`` ::

	clips <option>*
	
	<option> ::= -f <filename> |
	
	-f2 <filename> |
	
	-l <filename>

For the **-f** option, <filename> is a file that contains CLIPS
commands. If the **exit** command is included in the file, CLIPS will
halt and the user is returned to the operat­ing system after executing
the commands in the file. If an **exit** command is not in the file,
CLIPS will enter in its interactive state after executing the commands
in the file. Commands in the file should be entered exactly as they
would be interactively (i.e. opening and closing parentheses must be
included and a carriage return must be at the end of the command). The
**-f** command line option is equivalent to interactively entering a
**batch** command as the first command to the CLIPS prompt.

The **-f2** option is similar to the **-f** option, but is equivalent to
interactively entering a **batch\*** command. The commands stored in
<filename> are immediately executed, but the commands and their return
values are not displayed as they would be for a **batch** command.

For the **-l** option, <filename> should be a file containing CLIPS
constructs. This file will be loaded into the environment. The **-l**
command line option is equivalent to interactively entering a **load**
command.

Files specified using the **–f** option are not processed until the
command prompt appears, so these files will always be processed after
files specified using the **–f2** and **–l** options.

2.1.3 Integration with Other Programming Languages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using an expert system, two kinds of integration are important:
embedding CLIPS in other systems, and calling external functions from
CLIPS. CLIPS was designed to allow both kinds of integration.

Using CLIPS as an embedded application allows the easy integration of
CLIPS with existing systems. This is useful in cases where the expert
system is a small part of a larger task or needs to share data with
other functions. In these situations, CLIPS can be called as a
subroutine and information may be passed to and from CLIPS. Em­bedded
applications are discussed in the *Advanced Programming Guide*.

It also may be useful to call external functions while executing a CLIPS
construct or from the top-level of the interactive interface. CLIPS
variables or literal values may be passed to an external function, and
functions may return val­ues to CLIPS. The easy addition of external
functions allows CLIPS to be extended or customized in almost any way.
The *Advanced Programming Guide* describes how to integrate CLIPS with
functions or systems written in C as well as in other lan­guages.

2.2 Reference Manual Syntax
---------------------------

The terminology used throughout this manual to describe the CLIPS syntax
is fairly com­mon to computer reference manuals. Plain words or
characters, particularly paren­theses, are to be typed exactly as they
appear. Bolded words or characters, however, represent a verbal
description of what is to be entered. Sequences of words enclosed in
single-angle brackets (called terms or non-terminal symbols), such as
<string>, represent a single entity of the named class of items to be
supplied by the user. A non-terminal symbol followed by a \*, represents
*zero or more* entities of the named class of items which must be
supplied by the user. A non-terminal symbol followed by a +, represents
*one or more* entities of the named class of items which must be
supplied by the user. A \* or + by itself is to be typed as it appears.
Vertical and horizontal ellipsis (three dots arranged respectively
vertically and horizontally) are also used between non-terminal symbols
to indicate the occurrence of one or more entities. A term enclosed
within square brackets, such as [<comment>], is optional (i.e. it may or
may not be included). Vertical bars indicate a choice between multiple
terms. White spaces (tabs, spaces, carriage re­turns) are used by CLIPS
only as delimiters between terms and are ignored otherwise (unless
inside double quotes). The ::= symbol is used to indicate how a
non-terminal symbol can be replaced. For example, the following syntax
description indicates that a <lexeme> can be replaced with either a
<symbol> or a <string>. ::

	<lexeme> ::= <symbol> | <string>

A complete BNF listing for CLIPS constructs along with some commonly
used replacements for non-terminal symbols are listed in appendix G.

2.3 Basic Programming Elements
------------------------------

CLIPS provides three basic elements for writing programs: primitive data
types, functions for manipulating data, and constructs for adding to a
knowledge base.

2.3.1 Data Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CLIPS provides eight primitive data types for representing information.
These types are **float**, **integer**, **symbol**, **string**,
**external-address**, **fact-address**, **instance-name** and
**instance-address**. Numeric information can be represented using
floats and integers. Symbolic information can be represented using
symbols and strings.

A **number**; consists *only* of digits (0-9), a decimal point
(.), a sign (+ or -), and, optionally, an (e) for exponential notation
with its corresponding sign. A number is either stored as a float; or an
integer. Any number consisting of an optional sign followed by only
digits is stored as an **integer** (represented internally by CLIPS as a
C long integer). All other numbers are stored as **floats** (represented
internally by CLIPS as a C double-precision float). The number of
significant digits will de­pend on the machine implementation. Roundoff
errors also may occur, again depend­ing on the machine implementation.
As with any computer language, care should be taken when comparing
floating-point values to each other or comparing integers to
floating-point values. Some examples of integers are
::

   237 15 +12 -32

Some examples of floats are
::

  237e3 15.09 +12.0 -32.3e-7

Specifically, integers use the following format:
::

	<integer> ::= [+ \| -] <digit>+
	
	<digit> ::= 0 \| 1 \| 2 \| 3 \| 4 \| 5 \| 6 \| 7 \| 8 \| 9
	

Floating point numbers use the following format:
::
	
	<float> ::= <integer> <exponent> \|
	
	<integer> . [<exponent>] \|
	
	. <unsigned integer> [<exponent>] \|
	
	<integer> . <unsigned integer> [<exponent>]
	
	<unsigned-integer> ::= <digit>+
	
	<exponent> ::= e \| E <integer>

A sequence of characters which does not exactly follow the format of a
number is treated as a symbol (see the next paragraph).

A **symbol** in CLIPS is any sequence of characters that starts with any
printable ASCII character and is followed by zero or more printable
ASCII characters. When a delimiter is found, the symbol is ended. The
following characters act as **delimiters**: any non-printable ASCII
character (including spaces, tabs, carriage returns, and line feeds), a
double quote, opening and closing parentheses “(” and “)”, an ampersand
“&”, a vertical bar “|”, a less than “<”, and a tilde “~”. A semicolon
“;” starts a CLIPS comment (see section 2.3.3) and also acts as a
de­limiter. Delimiters may not be included in symbols with the exception
of the “<“ character which may be the first character in a symbol. In
addition, a symbol may not begin with either the “?” character or the
“$?” sequence of characters (although a symbol may contain these
characters). These characters are reserved for variables (which are
discussed later in this section). CLIPS is case sensitive (i.e.
uppercase letters will match only uppercase let­ters). Note that numbers
are a special case of symbols (i.e. they satisfy the definition of a
symbol, but they are treated as a different data type). Some simple
examples of symbols are ::

  foo Hello B76-HI bad_value

  127A 456-93-039 @+=-% 2each

A **string** is a set of characters that starts with a double quote (")
and is followed by zero or more printable characters. A string ends with
double quotes. Double quotes may be embedded within a string by placing
a backslash (\) in front of the character. A backslash may be embedded
by placing two consecutive back­slash characters in the string. Some
examples are  ::

  "foo" "a and b" "1 number" "a\"quote"

Note that the string “abcd" is not the same as the symbol *abcd*. They
both contain the same characters, but are of different types. The same
holds true for the instance name [abcd].

An **external-address** is the address of an external data structure
returned by a function (written in a language such as C or Ada) that has
been integrated with CLIPS. This data type can only be created by
calling a function (i.e. it is not possible to specify an
external-address by typing the value). In the basic version of CLIPS
(which has no user defined external functions), it is not possible to
create this data type. External-addresses are discussed in further
detail in the *Advanced Programming Guide*;. Within CLIPS, the printed
representation of an external-address is ::

  <Pointer-XXXXXX>

where XXXXXX is the external-address.

A **fact** is a list of atomic values that are either referenced
positionally (ordered facts) or by name (non-ordered or template facts).
Facts are referred to by index or address; section 2.4.1 gives more
details. The printed format of a **fact-address** is:
::

  <Fact-XXX>

where XXX is the fact-index.

An **instance** is an **object** that is an instantiation or specific
example of a **class**. Objects in CLIPS are defined to be floats,
integers, symbols, strings, multifield values, external-addresses,
fact-addresses or instances of a user-defined class. A user-defined
class is created using the **defclass** construct. An instance of a
user-defined class is created with the **make-instance** function, and
such an instance can be referred to uniquely by address. Within the
scope of a module (see section 10.5.1), an instance can also be uniquely
referred to by name. All of these definitions will be covered in more
detail in Sections 2.4.2, 2.5.2.3, 2.6 and 9. An **instance-name** is
formed by enclosing a symbol within left and right brackets. Thus, pure
symbols may not be surrounded by brackets. If the CLIPS Object Oriented
Language (COOL) is not included in a particular CLIPS configuration,
then brackets may be wrapped around symbols. Some examples of
instance-names are:
::

  [pump-1] [foo] [+++] [123-890]

Note that the brackets are not part of the name of the instance; they
merely indicate that the enclosed symbol is an instance-name. An
**instance-address** can only be obtained by binding the return value of
a function called **instance-address** or by binding a variable to an
instance matching an object pattern on the LHS of a rule (i.e., it is
not possible to specify an instance-address by typing the value). A
reference to an instance of a user-defined class can either be by name
or address; instance-addresses should only be used when speed is
critical. Within CLIPS, the printed representation of an
instance-address is ::

  <Instance-XXX>

where XXX is the name of the instance.

In CLIPS, a placeholder that has a value (one of the primitive data
types) is referred to as a **field**. The primitive data types are
referred to as **single-field values**. A **constant** is a non-varying
single field value directly expressed as a series of characters (which
means that external-addresses, fact-addresses and instance-addresses
cannot be expressed as constants because they can only be obtained
through function calls and variable bindings). A **multifield value** is
a sequence of zero or more single field values. When displayed by CLIPS,
multifield values are enclosed in parentheses. Collectively, single and
multifield values are referred to as **values**. Some examples of
multifield values are ::

  (a) (1 bar foo) () (x 3.0 "red" 567)

Note that the multifield value (a) is not the same as the single field
value *a*. Multifield values are created either by calling functions
which return multifield values, by using wildcard arguments in a
deffunction, object message-handler, or method, or by binding variables
during the pattern-matching process for rules. In CLIPS, a **variable**
is a symbolic location that is used to store values. Variables are used
by many of the CLIPS constructs (such as defrule, deffunction,
defmethod, and defmessage-handler) and their usage is explained in the
sections describing each of these constructs.

2.3.2 Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A **function** in CLIPS is a piece of executable code identified by a
specific name which returns a useful value or performs a useful side
effect (such as displaying information). Throughout the CLIPS
documentation, the word function is generally used to refer only to
functions which return a value (whereas commands and actions are used to
refer to functions which have a side effect but generally do not return
a value).

There are several types of functions. **User defined functions** and
**system defined functions** are pieces of code that have been written
in an external language (such as C, FORTRAN, or Ada) and linked with the
CLIPS environment. System defined functions are those functions that
have been defined internally by the CLIPS environment. User defined
functions are functions that have been defined externally of the CLIPS
environment. A complete list of system defined functions can be found in
appendix H.

The **deffunction** construct allows users to define new functions
directly in the CLIPS environment using CLIPS syntax. Functions defined
in this manner appear and act like other functions, however, instead of
being directly executed (as code written in an external language would
be) they are interpreted by the CLIPS environment. Deffunctions are also
discussed in section 2.5.2.1 in the context of procedural knowledge
representation.

Generic functions can be defined using the **defgeneric** and
**defmethod** constructs. Generic functions allow different pieces of
code to be executed depending upon the arguments passed to the generic
function. Thus, a single function name can be **overloaded** with more
than one piece of code. Generic functions are also discussed in section
2.5.2.2 in the context of procedural knowledge representation.

Function calls in CLIPS use a prefix notation – the arguments to a
function always appear after the function name. Function calls begin
with a left parenthesis, followed by the name of the function, then the
arguments to the function follow (each argument separated by one or more
spaces). Arguments to a function can be primitive data types, variables,
or another function call. The function call is then closed with a right
parenthesis. Some examples of function calls using the addition (+) and
multiplication (*) functions are shown following.
::

	(+ 3 4 5)
	
	(\* 5 6.0 2)
	
	(+ 3 (\* 8 9) 4)
	
	(\* 8 (+ 3 (\* 2 3 4) 9) (\* 3 4))

While a function refers to a piece of executable code identified by a
specific name, an **expression** refers to a function which has its
arguments specified (which may or may not be functions calls as well).
Thus the previous examples are expressions which make calls to the \*
and + functions.

2.3.3 Constructs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several defining **constructs** appear in CLIPS: **defmodule**,
**defrule**, **deffacts**, **deftemplate**, **defglobal**,
**deffunction**, **defclass**, **definstances**, **defmessage-handler**,
**defgeneric**, and **defmethod**. All constructs in CLIPS are
surrounded by parentheses. The construct opens with a left parenthe­sis
and closes with a right parenthesis. Defining a construct differs from
calling a function primarily in effect. Typically a function call leaves
the CLIPS environment unchanged (with some notable exceptions such as
resetting or clearing the environment or opening a file). Defining a
construct, however, is explicitly intended to alter the CLIPS
environment by adding to the CLIPS knowledge base. Unlike function
calls, constructs never have a return value.

As with any programming language, it is highly beneficial to comment
CLIPS code. All constructs (with the exception of defglobal) allow a
comment directly following the construct name. Comments also can be
placed within CLIPS code by using a semicolon (;). Everything from the
semicolon until the next return character will be ignored by CLIPS. If
the semicolon is the first character in the line, the entire line will
be treated as a comment. Examples of commented code will be pro­vided
throughout the reference manual. Semicolon commented text is not saved
by CLIPS when loading constructs (however, the optional comment string
within a construct is saved).

2.4 Data Abstraction
--------------------

There are three primary formats for representing information in CLIPS:
facts, objects and global variables.

2.4.1 Facts
~~~~~~~~~~~

Facts are one of the basic high-level forms for representing information
in a CLIPS system. Each **fact** represents a piece of information that
has been placed in the current list of facts, called the **fact-list**.
Facts are the fundamental unit of data used by rules (see section
2.5.1).

Facts may be added to the fact-list (using the **assert** command),
removed from the fact-list (using the **retract** command), modified
(using the **modify** command), or duplicated (using the **duplicate**
command) through explicit user interaction or as a CLIPS program
executes;. The number of facts in the fact-list and the amount of
information that can be stored in a fact is limited only by the amount
of memory in the computer. If a fact is asserted into the fact-list that
exactly matches an already existing fact, the new assertion will be
ignored (however, this behavior can be changed, see sections 13.4.4 and
13.4.5).

Some commands, such as the **retract**, **modify**, and **duplicate**
commands, require a fact to be specified. A fact can be specified either
by **fact-index** or **fact-address**. Whenever a fact is added (or
modified) it is given a unique integer index called a fact-index.
Fact-indices start at zero and are incremented by one for each new or
changed fact. Whenever a **reset** or **clear** command is given, the
fact-indices restart at zero. A fact may also be specified through the
use of a fact-address. A fact-address can be obtained by capturing the
return value of commands which return fact addresses (such as
**assert**, **modify**, and **duplicate**) or by binding a variable to
the fact address of a fact which matches a pattern on the LHS of a rule
(see section 5.4.1.8 for details).

A **fact identifier** is a shorthand notation for displaying a fact. It
consists of the character “f”, followed by a dash, followed by the
fact-index of the fact. For example, f-10 refers to the fact with
fact-index 10.

A fact is stored in one of two formats: ordered or non-ordered.

2.4.1.1 Ordered Facts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Ordered facts** consist of a symbol followed by a sequence of zero or
more fields separated by spaces and delimited by an opening parenthesis
on the left and a closing parenthesis on the right. The first field of
an ordered fact specifies a “relation” that applied to the remaining
fields in the ordered fact. For example, (father-of jack bill) states
that bill is the father of jack.

Some examples of ordered facts are shown following.
::
	
	(the pump is on)
	
	(altitude is 10000 feet)
	
	(grocery-list bread milk eggs)

Fields in a non-ordered fact may be of any of the primitive data types
(with the exception of the first field which must be a symbol), and no
restriction is placed on the ordering of fields. The following symbols
are reserved and should not be used as the *first* field in any fact
(ordered or non-ordered): *test*, *and*, *or*, *not*, *declare*,
*logical*, *object*, exists, and forall. These words are reserved only
when used as a deftemplate name (whether explicitly defined or implied).
These symbols may be used as slot names, however, this is not
recommended.

2.4.1.2 Non-ordered Facts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ordered facts encode information positionally. To access that
information, a user must know not only what data is stored in a fact but
which field contains the data. **Non-ordered (or deftemplate) facts**
provide the user with the ability to abstract the structure of a fact by
assign­ing names to each field in the fact. The **deftemplate**
construct (see section 3) is used to create a template that can then be
used to access fields by name. The deftemplate construct is analogous to
a record or structure definition in programming languages such as Pascal
and C.

The deftemplate construct allows the name of a template to be defined
along with zero or more definitions of **named fields** or **slots**.
Unlike ordered facts, the slots of a deftemplate fact may be constrained
by type, value, and numeric range. In addition, default values can be
specified for a slot. A slot consists of an opening parenthesis followed
by the name of the slot, zero or more fields, and a closing parenthesis.
Note that slots may not be used in an ordered fact and that positional
fields may not be used in a deftemplate fact.

Deftemplate facts are distinguished from ordered facts by the first
field within the fact. The first field of all facts must be a symbol,
however, if that symbol corresponds to the name of a deftemplate, then
the fact is a deftemplate fact. The first field of a deftemplate fact is
followed by a list of zero or more slots. As with ordered facts,
deftemplate facts are enclosed by an opening parenthesis on the left and
a closing parenthesis on the right.

Some examples of deftemplate facts are shown following.
::

	(client (name "Joe Brown") (id X9345A))
	
	(point-mass (x-velocity 100) (y-velocity -200))
	
	(class (teacher "Martha Jones") (#-students 30) (Room "37A"))
	
	(grocery-list (#-of-items 3) (items bread milk eggs))
	
Note that the order of slots in a deftemplate fact is not important. For
example the following facts are all identical:
::
	
	(class (teacher "Martha Jones") (#-students 30) (Room "37A"))
	
	(class (#-students 30) (teacher "Martha Jones") (Room "37A"))
	
	(class (Room "37A") (#-students 30) (teacher "Martha Jones"))

In contrast, note that the following ordered fact *are not* identical.
::

	(class "Martha Jones" 30 "37A")
	
	(class 30 "Martha Jones" "37A")
	
	(class "37A" 30 "Martha Jones")

The im­mediate advantages of clarity and slot order independence for
deftemplate facts should be readily apparent.

In addition to being asserted and retracted, deftemplate facts can also
be modified and duplicated (using the **modify** and **duplicate**
commands). Modifying a fact changes a set of specified slots within that
fact. Duplicating a fact creates a new fact identical to the original
fact and then changes a set of specified slots within the new fact. The
benefit of using the modify and duplicate commands is that slots which
don’t change, don’t have to be specified.

2.4.1.3 Initial Facts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The **deffacts** construct allows a set of *a priori* or initial
knowledge to be specified as a collection of facts. When the CLIPS
environment is reset (using the **reset** command) every fact specified
within a deffacts construct in the CLIPS knowledge base is added to the
fact-list.

2.4.2 Objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An **object** in CLIPS is defined to be a symbol, a string, a
floating-point or integer number, a multifield value, an
external-address or an instance of a user-defined class. Section 2.3.1
explains how to reference instances of user-defined classes. Objects are
described in two basic parts: properties and behavior. A **class** is a
template for common properties and behavior of objects that are
**instances** of that class. Some examples of objects and their classes
are:

=================================== ==========================
**Object (Printed Representation)** **Class**
=================================== ==========================
Rolls-Royce                         SYMBOL
"Rolls-Royce"                       STRING
8.0                                 FLOAT
8                                   INTEGER
(8.0 Rolls-Royce 8 [Rolls-Royce])   MULTIFIELD
<Pointer-00CF61AB>                  EXTERNAL-ADDRESS
[Rolls-Royce]                       CAR (a user-defined class)
=================================== ==========================

Objects in CLIPS are split into two important categories: primitive
types and instances of *user-defined* classes. These two types of
objects differ in the way they are referenced, created and deleted as
well as how their properties are specified.

Primitive type objects are referenced simply by giving their value, and
they are created and deleted implicitly by CLIPS as they are needed.
Primitive type objects have no names or slots, and their classes are
predefined by CLIPS. The behavior of primitive type objects is like that
of instances of user-defined classes, however, in that you can define
message-handlers and attach them to the primitive type classes. It is
anticipated that primitive types will not be used often in an
object-oriented programming (OOP) context; the main reason classes are
provided for them is for use in generic functions. Generic functions use
the classes of their arguments to determine which methods to execute;
sections 2.3.2, 2.5.2.2 and 8 give more detail.

An instance of a user-defined class is referenced by name or address,
and they are created and deleted explicitly via messages and special
functions. The properties of an instance of a *user-defined* class are
expressed by a set of slots, which the object obtains from its class. As
previously defined, slots are named single field or multifield values.
For example, the object Rolls-Royce is an instance of the class CAR. One
of the slots in class CAR might be “price”, and the Rolls-Royce object’s
value for this slot might be $75,000.00. The behavior of an object is
specified in terms of procedural code called message-handlers, which are
attached to the object’s class. Message-handlers and manipulation of
objects are described in Section 2.5.2.3. All instances of a
user-defined class have the same set of slots, but each instance may
have different values for those slots. However, two instances that have
the same set of slots do not necessarily belong to the same class, since
two different classes can have identical sets of slots.

The primary difference between object slots and template (or
non-ordered) facts is the notion of inheritance. Inheritance allows the
properties and behavior of a class to be described in terms of other
classes. COOL supports multiple inheritance: a class may directly
inherit slots and message-handlers from more than one class. Since
inheritance is only useful for slots and message-handlers, it is often
not meaningful to inherit from one of the primitive type classes, such
as MULTIFIELD or NUMBER. This is because these classes cannot have slots
and usually do not have message-handlers.

Further discussion on these topics can be found in Section 2.6, and a
comprehensive description of the CLIPS Object-Oriented Language (COOL)
can be found in Section 9.

2.4.2.1 Initial Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The **definstances** construct allows a set of *a priori* or initial
knowledge to be specified as a collection of instances of user-defined
classes. When the CLIPS environment is reset (using the **reset**
command) every instance specified within a definstances construct in the
CLIPS knowledge base is added to the instance-list.

2.4.3 Global Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The **defglobal** construct allows variables to be defined which are
global in scope throughout the CLIPS environment. That is, a global
variable can be accessed anywhere in the CLIPS environment and retains
its value independent of other constructs. In contrast, some constructs
(such as defrule and deffunction) allow local variables to be defined
within the definition of the construct. These local variables can be
referred to within the construct, but have no meaning outside the
construct. A CLIPS global variable is similar to global variables found
in procedural programming languages such as LISP, C and Ada. Unlike C
and Ada, however, CLIPS global variables are weakly typed (they are not
restricted to holding a value of a single data type).

2.5 Knowledge Representation
----------------------------

CLIPS provides heuristic and procedural paradigms for representing
knowledge. These two paradigms are discussed in this section.
Object-oriented programming (which combines aspects of both data
abstraction and procedural knowledge) is discussed in section 2.6.

2.5.1 Heuristic Knowledge – Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the primary methods of representing knowledge in CLIPS is a rule.
Rules are used to represent heuristics, or “rules of thumb”, which
specify a set of actions to be performed for a given situation. The
de­veloper of an expert system defines a set of rules that collectively
work together to solve a problem. A **rule** is composed of an
**antecedent** and a **consequent**. The antecedent of a rule is also
referred to as the **if portion** or the **left-hand side** (LHS) of the
rule. The consequent of a rule is also referred to as the **then
portion** or the **right-hand side** (RHS) of the rule.

The antecedent of a rule is a set of **conditions** (or **conditional
elements**) that must be satisfied for the rule to be applicable. In
CLIPS, the conditions of a rule are satisfied based on the existence or
non-existence of specified facts in the fact-list or specified instances
of user-defined classes in the instance-list. One type of condition that
can be specified is a **pattern**. Patterns consist of a set of
restrictions that are used to determine which facts or objects satisfy
the condition specified by the pattern. The process of matching facts
and objects to patterns is called **pattern-matching**. CLIPS provides a
mechanism, called the **inference engine**, which automatically matches
patterns against the current state of the fact-list and instance-list
and determines which rules are applicable.

The consequent of a rule is the set of actions to be executed when the
rule is applicable. The actions of applicable rules are executed when
the CLIPS inference engine is instructed to begin execution of
applicable rules. If more than one rule is applicable, the inference
engine uses a **conflict resolution strategy** to select which rule
should have its actions executed. The actions of the selected rule are
executed (which may affect the list of applicable rules) and then the
inference engine selects another rule and executes its actions. This
process continues until no applicable rules remain.

In many ways, rules can be thought of as IF-THEN statements found in
procedural programming languages such as C and Ada. However, the
conditions of an IF-THEN statement in a procedural language are only
evaluated when the program flow of control is directly at the IF-THEN
statement. In contrast, rules act like WHENEVER-THEN statements. The
inference engine always keeps track of rules that have their conditions
satisfied and thus rules can immediately be executed when they are
applicable. In this sense, rules are similar to exception handlers found
in languages such as Ada.

2.5.2 Procedural Knowledge
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CLIPS also supports a procedural paradigm for representing knowledge
like that of more conventional languages, such as Pascal and C.
Deffunctions and generic functions allow the user to define new
executable elements to CLIPS that perform a useful side-effect or return
a useful value. These new functions can be called just like the built-in
functions of CLIPS. Message-handlers allow the user to define the
behavior of objects by specifying their response to messages.
Deffunctions, generic functions and message-handlers are all procedural
pieces of code specified by the user that CLIPS executes interpretively
at the appropriate times. Defmodules allow a knowledge base to be
partitioned.

2.5.2.1 Deffunctions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Deffunctions allow you to define new functions in CLIPS directly. In
previous versions of CLIPS, the only way to have user-defined functions
was to write them in some external language, such as C or Ada, and then
recompile and relink CLIPS with the new functions. The body of a
deffunction is a series of expressions similar to the RHS of a rule that
are executed in order by CLIPS when the deffunction is called. The
return value of a deffunction is the value of the last expression
evaluated within the deffunction. Calling a deffunction is identical to
calling any other function in CLIPS. Deffunctions are covered
comprehensively in Section 7.

2.5.2.2 Generic Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Generic functions are similar to deffunctions in that they can be used
to define new procedural code directly in CLIPS, and they can be called
like any other function. However, generic functions are much more
powerful because they can be **overloaded**. A generic function will do
different things depending on the types (or classes) and number of its
arguments. Generic functions are comprised of multiple components called
methods, where each method handles different cases of arguments for the
generic function. For example, you might overload the “+” operator to do
string concatenation when it is passed strings as arguments. However,
the “+” operator will still perform arithmetic addition when passed
numbers. There are two methods in this example: an explicit one for
strings defined by the user and an implicit one which is the standard
CLIPS arithmetic addition operator. The return value of a generic
function is the evaluation of the last expression in the method
executed. Generic functions are covered comprehensively in Section 8.

2.5.2.3 Object Message-Passing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Objects are described in two basic parts: properties and behavior.
Object properties are specified in terms of slots obtained from the
object’s class; slots are discussed in more detail in Section 2.4.2.
Object behavior is specified in terms of procedural code called
message-handlers which are attached to the object’s class. Objects are
manipulated via message-passing. For example, to cause the Rolls-Royce
object, which is an instance of the class CAR, to start its engine, the
user must call the **send** function to send the message “start-engine”
to the Rolls-Royce. How the Rolls-Royce responds to this message will be
dictated by the execution of the message-handlers for “start-engine”
attached to the CAR class and any of its superclasses. The result of a
message is similar to a function call in CLIPS: a useful return value or
side-effect.

Further discussion on message-handlers can be found in Section 2.6, and
a comprehensive description of the CLIPS Object-Oriented Language (COOL)
can be found in Section 9.

2.5.2.4 Defmodules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Defmodules allow a knowledge base to be partitioned. Every construct
defined must be placed in a module. The programmer can explicitly
control which constructs in a module are visible to other modules and
which constructs from other modules are visible to a module. The
visibility of facts and instances between modules can be controlled in a
similar manner. Modules can also be used to control the flow of
execution of rules. Defmodules are covered comprehensively in Section
10.

2.6 CLIPS Object-Oriented Language
----------------------------------

This section gives a brief overview of the programming elements of the
CLIPS Object-Oriented Language (COOL). COOL includes elements of data
abstraction and knowledge representation. This section gives an overview
of COOL as a whole, incorporating the elements of both concepts.
References to instanes of user-defined classes are discussed in Section
2.3.1, and the structure of objects is discussed in Sections 2.4.2 and
2.5.2.3. The comprehensive details of COOL are given in Section 9.

2.6.1 COOL Deviations from a Pure OOP Paradigm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a pure OOP language, *all* programming elements are objects which can
only be manipulated via messages. In CLIPS, the definition of an object
is much more constrained: floating-point and integer numbers, symbols,
strings, multifield values, external-addresses, fact-addresses and
instances of user-defined classes. All objects *may* be manipulated with
messages, except instances of user-defined classes, which *must* be. For
example, in a pure OOP system, to add two numbers together, you would
send the message “add” to the first number object with the second number
object as an argument. In CLIPS, you may simply call the “+” function
with the two numbers as arguments, or you can define message-handlers
for the NUMBER class which allow you to do it in the purely OOP fashion.

All programming elements that are not objects must be manipulated in a
non-OOP utilizing function tailored for those programming elements. For
example, to print a rule, you call the function **ppdefrule**; you do
not send a message “print” to a rule, since it is not an object.

2.6.2 Primary OOP Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are five primary characteristics that an OOP system must possess:
**abstraction**, **encapsulation**, **inheritance**, **polymorphism**
and **dynamic binding**. An abstraction is a higher level, more
intuitive representation for a complex concept. Encapsulation is the
process whereby the implementation details of an object are masked by a
well-defined external interface. Classes may be described in terms of
other classes by use of inheritance. Polymorphism is the ability of
different objects to respond to the same message in a specialized
manner. Dynamic binding is the ability to defer the selection of which
specific message-handlers will be called for a message until run-time.

The definition of new classes allows the abstraction of new data types
in COOL. The slots and message-handlers of these classes describe the
properties and behavior of a new group of objects.

COOL supports encapsulation by requiring message-passing for the
manipulation of instances of user-defined classes. An instance cannot
respond to a message for which it does not have a defined
message-handler.

COOL allows the user to specify some or all of the properties and
behavior of a class in terms of one or more unrelated superclasses. This
process is called **multiple inheritance**. COOL uses the existing
hierarchy of classes to establish a linear ordering called the **class
precedence list** for a new class. Objects that are instances of this
new class can inherit properties (slots) and behavior (message-handlers)
from each of the classes in the class precedence list. The word
precedence implies that properties and behavior of a class first in the
list override conflicting definitions of a class later in the list.

One COOL object can respond to a message in a completely different way
than another object; this is polymorphism. This is accomplished by
attaching message-handlers with differing actions but which have the
same name to the classes of these two objects respectively.

Dynamic binding is supported in that an object reference (see section
2.3.1) in a **send** function call is not bound until run-time. For
example, an instance-name or variable might refer to one object at the
time a message is sent and another at a later time.

2.6.3 Instance-set Queries and Distributed Actions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to the ability of rules to directly pattern-match on
objects, COOL provides a useful query system for determining, grouping
and performing actions on sets of instances of user-defined classes that
meet user-defined criteria. The query system allows you to associate
instances that are either related or not. You can simply use the query
system to determine if a particular association set exists, you can save
the set for future reference, or you can iterate an action over the set.
An example of the use of the query system might be to find the set of
all pairs of boys and girls that have the same age.
